## Design Narrative

The design scope sought to correct the building and apartment deficiencies, add new spaces and provide a "deep energy retrofit". Complete separation of all functions and utilities was also an important goal.

Archtecurally, creating a front entry, adding a second bathroom and laundry alcoves for each apartment were the main design goals.

The original building was based on a "catalog" modular layout with a shared entry vesitbule and laundry space. Strangely, the building was sited 10 feet from the lot's south boundary - without a variance. At that time there was no driveway access to either side of the building. The building had been located in the back yard of 360 High Street without a lot division. A City of Belfast consent agreement added the driveway and its easement and created the lot division - with a six foot setback between 358 High Street's east side and the 360 High Street lot. The consent agreement was developed after the original owners defaulted, and a mortgage company assumed control. However, the driveway accessed the building's rear, the building's north side, not its intended front. However, for this project's new entry there was sufficient space on tthe building's north side for an addition to serve as an entry, mudroom with laundry alcove. Adding the new entry with laundry alcoves allowed the shared the original building's vestibule and shared laundry space to be allocated for a new half bath for each apartment.

The site drainage needed to be reimagined to stop water intrusion into the crawlspace. The elevation of existing north side culvert and drainage ditch were lowered. A ditch was created on the lot's west side to capture the drainage from the adjacent lot's slope and discharging to the main ditch. Doing so created positive slope from new perimeter footing drains. A second perimeter collection system from roof gutters was created to discharge to the main drainage ditch. Meanwhile the outlet of a floor drain in the crawl space was discovered and rerouted to the ditch. On the south side, an existing swale was enhanced.

The envelope thermal retrofit needed to answer the question: how "deep" should the retrofit (DER) be? The classic Rvalue receipe is "5, 10, 20, 40 ,60", referring to the R values of windows, below grade floor, below grade wall, above grade wall and roof, respectively. There was no original building crawlspace floor, below grade wall nor roof insulation. For this project, it made sense to incorporate the crawl space and attic within the insulated boundary to provide space for mechanical equipment. A "lite" DER for this project, was 5, 5, 19, 27 and 54. Also, "chain saw" removal of soffits to allow for continuous air barrier and insulation for the above grade walls and roof.

Once there's a well-insulated and tight envelope, heating and cooling loads are small and HVAC equipment capacity follow. A single zone, ducted heat pump for each apartment was the obvious choice and received the maximum Efficiency Maine incentive.
